Initial structure of README with some content examples (#3)
w3c-cg/awesome-semantic-shapes: README.md

- [RDF4J SHACL Engine](https://github.com/eclipse-rdf4j/rdf4j/tree/main/core/sail/shacl) <img alt="GitHub last commit" src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/eclipse-rdf4j/rdf4j" align="top"> - Supports SHACL Core (without some property paths), SHACL-SPARQL, incremental validation; `BSD-3-Clause` license; `Java`.
- [rdf-validate-shacl](https://github.com/zazuko/rdf-validate-shacl) <img alt="GitHub last commit" src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/zazuko/rdf-validate-shacl" align="top"> - Supports SHACL Core; pure JavaScript validator on top of the [RDFJS](https://rdf.js.org/) stack; [playground](https://zazuko.github.io/shacl-playground); `MIT` license; `JavaScript`.
- [SHACL for Ruby](https://github.com/ruby-rdf/shacl) ![GitHub last commit](https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/ruby-rdf/shacl) - A pure-Ruby library for working with the Shape Constraint Language to validate the shape of RDF graphs; `BSD-3-Clause` license; `Ruby`.

> - [shacl-engine](https://github.com/rdf-ext/shacl-engine) <img alt="GitHub last commit" src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/rdf-ext/shacl-engine" align="top"> - Supports SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL; A fast engine for data provided as [RDF/JS](http://rdf.js.org/data-model-spec/) objects; [playground](https://playground.rdf-ext.org/shacl/); `MIT` license; `JavaScript`.

Reviewer: The command line tool [rdf-ext-cli](https://github.com/rdf-ext/rdf-ext-cli) provides a validation feature based on shacl-engine. Data and shapes can be given as file, URL, or SPARQL endpoint + query.

- [An Overview of SHACL Shapes Constraint Language](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=_i3zTeMyRzU) - TopQuadrant, 2017.

## Presentations

## Specifications

- SHACL, W3C Recommendations & Notes
  - [Shapes Constraint Language (SHACL)](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl/) - W3C Recommendation, 20 July 2017.
  - [SHACL Advanced Features](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl-af/) - W3C Working Group Note, 08 June 2017.
  - [SHACL JavaScript Extensions](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl-js/) - W3C Working Group Note, 08 June 2017.
  - [SHACL Test Suite and Implementation Report](https://w3c.github.io/data-shapes/data-shapes-test-suite/) - W3C Document 17 January 2024.
  - [SHACL Use Cases and Requirements](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl-ucr/) - W3C Working Group Note 20 July 2017.

- SHACL, Community Group Latest Drafts & Notes
  - [SHACL 1.2 Core](https://w3c.github.io/shacl/shacl-core/)
  - [SHACL 1.2 SPARQL Extensions](https://w3c.github.io/shacl/shacl-sparql/)
  - [SHACL Advanced Features 1.1](https://w3c.github.io/shacl/shacl-af/)
  - [SHACL Compact Syntax](https://w3c.github.io/shacl/shacl-compact-syntax/)
  - [SHACL JavaScript Extensions](https://w3c.github.io/shacl/shacl-js/)

> 

Reviewer: Maybe also include other SHACL-related specifications like the [The Shape Topologies algorithm](https://w3id.org/tree/specification/shape-topologies)?

Author: I propose a new subsection like "SHACL-related specifications" with all the random stuff here. Maybe we could also put [DASH Data Shapes](https://datashapes.org) here?

Reviewer 2: Sure!

Author: It's in the last commit, already.

# Awesome Semantic Shapes [![Awesome](https://awesome.re/badge.svg)](https://awesome.re)

A curated list of Semantic Shapes resources.

Contributions welcome! Please, read the [Contribution Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) first.

## Contents

- [SHACL Validators](#shacl-validators)

> - [ShEx Validators](#shex-validators)

Reviewer 3: Do we need two validator categories?

Author: It is useful from "validator user" point of view to separate it. I assume (maybe wrongly), an average project had committed to SHACL or ShEx from the beginning. And project's CTO "selecting from" or "monitoring for a tool switch/upgrade" a particular category.

Reviewer 3: Okay, I realised my mistake. You are right, of course. Makes sense

Author: Also, it seems, it will be to long list if we combine it together.

- [Shapes Discovery Tools](#shapes-discovery-tools)
- [Shapes Collections](#shapes-collections)
- [Shape Conversion Tools](#shape-conversion-tools)
- [Shape Generators](#shape-generators)
- [Shape Editors, Visualizations](#shape-editors-visualizations)
- [Declarative UIs](#declarative-uis)
- [Book](#book)
- [Tutorials](#tutorials)
- [Presentations](#presentations)
- [Specifications](#specifications)

## SHACL Validators

> About this section. Optional. Keep this short and focus on the list.

Reviewer 3: To be removed?

Author: Yes, my bad. I'll fix it.

# Awesome Semantic Shapes [![Awesome](https://awesome.re/badge.svg)](https://awesome.re)

> A curated list of Semantic Shapes resources. Contributions welcome! Please, read the [Contribution Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) first.

> Semantic shapes enables you to validate RDF graphs against a set of conditions. Semantic shapes can also be viewed as a description of the data graphs that do satisfy these conditions. Such descriptions may be used for a variety of purposes beside validation, including user interface building, code generation and data integration. Semantic shapes could be described in SHACL or ShEx languages.

Reviewer 2: - "enable"
- use Semantic Newlines: https://sembr.org/

Reviewer 4: Ugh. Semantic Newlines documents "the `git diﬀ` command" (note the ligature) which doesn't exist; it's the `git diff` command.

I do encourage more frequent line breaks, so lines are shorter and generally fit into a single window width. I find 80 chars or so is generally best for most devices. I find semantic newlines *less* readable, because they frequently deliver wider lines.

Author: Sorry for my stupidity, but where did you get `ﬀ`? My browser shows two separate `ff` in all commands on the https://sembr.org webpage, on the github page, in the raw README.md markdown.

Reviewer 4: No stupidity in your question. Possibly some in programmers of Chrome or one of my active Chrome plugins, that's displaying ligatures without my express permission.

<img width="889" alt="image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/7c1b170e-8c1e-4ef4-8e7a-b837de9d28df">

Author: In mine it looks normal and I could select separate 'f' characters.
![image](https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/efb08fd0-f5d1-4843-b2cb-b8e48d6120b6)

## Contents

- [SHACL Validators](#shacl-validators)
- [ShEx Validators](#shex-validators)
- [Shapes Discovery Tools](#shapes-discovery-tools)
- [Shapes Collections](#shapes-collections)
- [Shape Conversion Tools](#shape-conversion-tools)
- [Shape Generators](#shape-generators)
- [Shape Editors, Visualizations](#shape-editors-visualizations)
- [Declarative UIs](#declarative-uis)
- [Book](#book)
- [Tutorials](#tutorials)
- [Presentations](#presentations)
- [Specifications](#specifications)
- [Legend](#legend)

## SHACL Validators

> - [Jena SHACL](https://github.com/apache/jena/) -- Java, Supports: SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL

Reviewer 2: We want the link to be most specific, into the SHACL documentation of the concrete product

Author: Do I understand correctly that all "validator links" in these two sections should point to the (list in a descending priority):

1. SHACL/ShEx documentation of this validator (for Jena or RDF4J, or Corese), and no need to add link to the sources repository in a source control system?
2. If no validator documentation was found, then the link should point to the validator module folder in the sources repository in a source control system?

Author: > * Afaik, English grammar uses `: ` not `--`

I checked with the [awesome-lint](https://github.com/sindresorhus/awesome-lint), it should be one dash `-` between a link and a description, not em-dash, not double-dash '--'. And it should be a comma in the end if there is a description (or no comma if a link only).

This simple construction -- is the most often one

[software] - Description

Or it could be a more complex construction (for example, here [brillout/awesome-react-components](https://github.com/brillout/awesome-react-components))

[software] - [docs] - [demo] - Description

Reviewer 4: Using a colon (without preceding space, with following space) instead of the em-dash is valid. There should probably be a period (not a comma) following the language in which the thing was written. There's no need for the colon following "Supports". There should probably be a period at the end of the line.
```
- [Jena SHACL](https://github.com/apache/jena/): Java. Supports SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL.
```

The "more complex construction" is yet more ugliness, to my eyes. I would much prefer a proper table, where any cell's text could wrap within the cell. The presented format is useful where tables are hard to write and/or render — but that's not the case for any of this content.

I don't know why [awesome-lint](https://github.com/sindresorhus/awesome-lint) should be treated as an authority on human-facing punctuation. I'm sure it does a pretty good job on linting *code*, but Markdown is, by design, closer to human language than to programming. I know coders tend to prefer hyphens, because they don't require a key-chord or more complex entry method, but hyphens aren't appropriate for the placements described.

If the reason the not-so-[awesome-lint](https://github.com/sindresorhus/awesome-lint) is being granted such authority is that this is an "awesome"-list, well, I think the "awe" it will trigger will be less than the "eww", and I suggest reconsideration and pushing back upstream.

Author: [awesome-lint](https://github.com/sindresorhus/awesome-lint) is a specialized markdown linter, tailored specifically to lint "awesome-XXX" lists of some "awesome stuff", created by the author of "awesome list of awesome lists". Some ad-hoc domain-specific convention.

- [RDF4J SHACL Sail](https://github.com/eclipse-rdf4j/rdf4j) -- Java

> - [TopBraid SHACL API](https://github.com/TopQuadrant/shacl) -- Java, based on Jena, supports: SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL, SHACL rules

Author: I have doubts about [TopQuadrant SHACL playground](https://shacl.org/playground/):
- It is a JS validator, not Java one. "...a version of the source code can be found at [SHACL-JS GitHub project](https://github.com/TopQuadrant/shacl-js)"
- "Last updated: 2017-05-01 and no longer actively maintained... See also [Zazuko SHACL Playground](https://zazuko.github.io/shacl-playground/) for a newer implementation"

> - [TopBraid SHACL API](https://github.com/TopQuadrant/shacl) -- Java, based on Jena, supports: SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL, SHACL rules

Author: We should change "last commit date" to "last release date" whenever it is possible?

From this (some examples with recent version and old version)
- [TopBraid SHACL API](https://github.com/TopQuadrant/shacl) <img alt="GitHub last commit" src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/TopQuadrant/shacl" align="top"> - Supports SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL, SHACL rules; based on Jena; [RDF validator](https://www.itb.ec.europa.eu/shacl/any/upload), [SHACL shapes validator](https://www.itb.ec.europa.eu/shacl/shacl/upload), [Sparna SHACL playground](https://shacl-play.sparna.fr/play/); `BSD-3-Clause` license; `Java`.
- [shexSpec/shex.js](https://github.com/shexjs/shex.js) <img alt="GitHub last commit" src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/shexjs/shex.js" align="top"> - JavaScript implementation of Shape Expressions; [playground](http://rawgit.com/shexSpec/shex.js/master/doc/shex-simple.html); `MIT` license; `JavaScript`.

To this?
- [TopBraid SHACL API](https://github.com/TopQuadrant/shacl) <img alt="GitHub Last Release" src="https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/TopQuadrant/shacl" align="top"> <img alt="GitHub Release Date" src="https://img.shields.io/github/release-date/TopQuadrant/shacl" align="top"> - Supports SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL, SHACL rules; based on Jena; [RDF validator](https://www.itb.ec.europa.eu/shacl/any/upload), [SHACL shapes validator](https://www.itb.ec.europa.eu/shacl/shacl/upload), [Sparna SHACL playground](https://shacl-play.sparna.fr/play/); `BSD-3-Clause` license; `Java`.
- [shexSpec/shex.js](https://github.com/shexjs/shex.js) <img alt="GitHub Last Release" src="https://img.shields.io/github/v/release/shexjs/shex.js" align="top"> <img alt="GitHub Release Date" src="https://img.shields.io/github/release-date/shexjs/shex.js" align="top"> - JavaScript implementation of Shape Expressions; [playground](http://rawgit.com/shexSpec/shex.js/master/doc/shex-simple.html); `MIT` license; `JavaScript`.

- [TopBraid SHACL API Extended](https://github.com/SHACL-X/shacl-x) -- Java, fork of TopBraid SHACL API + added SHACL-JS based on GraalVM Polyglot

## ShEx Validators

- [Apache Jena ShEx](https://jena.apache.org/documentation/shex/index.html) -- Java

> - [shexSpec/shex.js](https://github.com/shexjs/shex.js) -- JS, [playground](http://rawgit.com/shexSpec/shex.js/master/doc/shex-simple.html)

Author: I made an example with sub-bullets above

> - [shexSpec/shex.js](https://github.com/shexjs/shex.js) -- JS, [playground](http://rawgit.com/shexSpec/shex.js/master/doc/shex-simple.html)

Author: Done

- [ShacShifter](https://github.com/AKSW/ShacShifter) -- Python, ☠️, "shape shifter" from SHACL to other formats (currently RDForms)
- [SHACL To JSON Schema](https://github.com/comake/shacl-to-json-schema) -- TS, SHACL To JSON Schema translator

## Shape Generators

- [owl2shacl](https://github.com/sparna-git/owl2shacl) -- OWL 2 SHACL conversion rules

## Shape Editors, Visualizations

- [Allotrope Shape Editor](https://gitlab.com/allotrope-open-source/shape-editor)

## Declarative UIs

Data viewers/Editors based on shapes.

- [shaperone](https://forms.hypermedia.app) -- SHACL Shapes Form generator

## Book

- [Validating RDF Data (2018)](https://book.validatingrdf.com/) 

## Tutorials

- [Shapes applications and tools - ISWC'20 Tutorial](https://www.validatingrdf.com/tutorial/iswc2020/)

## Presentations

## Specifications

- SHACL, W3C Recommendations & Notes
  - [Shapes Constraint Language (SHACL)](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl/) -- W3C Recommendation, 20 July 2017
  - [SHACL Advanced Features](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl-af/) -- W3C Working Group Note, 08 June 2017
  - [SHACL JavaScript Extensions](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl-js/) -- W3C Working Group Note, 08 June 2017

>   - [SHACL Test Suite and Implementation Report](https://w3c.github.io/data-shapes/data-shapes-test-suite/) -- W3C Document 17 January 2024

Author: Fixed

# Awesome Semantic Shapes [![Awesome](https://awesome.re/badge.svg)](https://awesome.re)

> A curated list of Semantic Shapes resources. Contributions welcome!
> Please, read the [Contribution Guidelines](CONTRIBUTING.md) first.

Semantic shapes enable you to validate RDF graphs against a set of conditions.

> Semantic shapes can also be viewed as a description of the data graphs that do satisfy these conditions.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Semantic shapes can also be viewed as a description of data graphs that satisfy these conditions.
```

> Such descriptions may be used for a variety of purposes beside validation,
> including user interface building, code generation and data integration.
> Semantic shapes could be described in SHACL or ShEx languages.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Such descriptions may be used for a variety of purposes besides validation,
including user interface building, code generation, and data integration.
Semantic shapes are frequently described using the SHACL or ShEx language.
```

## SHACL Validators

> - [Jena SHACL](https://github.com/apache/jena/) - Java, Supports: SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL.
> - [RDF4J SHACL Sail](https://github.com/eclipse-rdf4j/rdf4j) - Java.
> - [TopBraid SHACL API](https://github.com/TopQuadrant/shacl) - Java, based on Jena, supports: SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL, SHACL rules.
> - [TopBraid SHACL API Extended](https://github.com/SHACL-X/shacl-x) - Java, fork of TopBraid SHACL API + added SHACL-JS based on GraalVM Polyglot.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Jena SHACL](https://github.com/apache/jena/) — Java; Supports: SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL.
- [RDF4J SHACL Sail](https://github.com/eclipse-rdf4j/rdf4j) — Java.
- [TopBraid SHACL API](https://github.com/TopQuadrant/shacl) — Java; based on Jena; supports: SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL, SHACL rules.
- [TopBraid SHACL API Extended](https://github.com/SHACL-X/shacl-x) — Java; fork of TopBraid SHACL API + added SHACL-JS based on GraalVM Polyglot.
```

## ShEx Validators

> - [Apache Jena ShEx](https://jena.apache.org/documentation/shex/index.html) - Java.
> - [shexSpec/shex.js](https://github.com/shexjs/shex.js) - [playground](http://rawgit.com/shexSpec/shex.js/master/doc/shex-simple.html) - JS.
> - [ShEx-validator](https://github.com/HW-SWeL/ShEx-validator) - JS.
> - [Validata](https://github.com/HW-SWeL/Validata) - [playground](http://hw-swel.github.io/Validata/) - [playground](https://www.w3.org/2015/03/ShExValidata/), JS.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Apache Jena ShEx](https://jena.apache.org/documentation/shex/index.html) — Java.
- [shexSpec/shex.js](https://github.com/shexjs/shex.js) — [playground](http://rawgit.com/shexSpec/shex.js/master/doc/shex-simple.html) — JS.
- [ShEx-validator](https://github.com/HW-SWeL/ShEx-validator) — JS.
- [Validata](https://github.com/HW-SWeL/Validata) — [playground](http://hw-swel.github.io/Validata/) — [playground](https://www.w3.org/2015/03/ShExValidata/), JS.
```

## Shapes Discovery Tools

> - [RDFminer](https://github.com/Wimmics/RDFminer) - Web application to automatically discovering SHACL shapes representative of an RDF data graph, by Wimmics.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [RDFminer](https://github.com/Wimmics/RDFminer) — Web application to automatically discover SHACL shapes representative of an RDF data graph, by Wimmics.
```

- [SHACL Discovery Service](https://github.com/AKSW/discover-shacl-shapes)

> - [Shapes of You index](https://index.semanticscience.org/) - SPARQL queries, OWL/SKOS vocabularies, SHACL/ShEx shapes indexed from public git repositories.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Shapes of You index](https://index.semanticscience.org/) — SPARQL queries, OWL/SKOS vocabularies, SHACL/ShEx shapes, indexed from public `git` repositories.
```

## Shapes Collections

> - [schema.org Shapes](http://datashapes.org/schema) - Schema.org, converted to SHACL by TopQuadrant.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [schema.org Shapes](http://datashapes.org/schema) — Schema.org, converted to SHACL by TopQuadrant.
```

## Shape Conversion Tools

> - [ShacShifter](https://github.com/AKSW/ShacShifter) - Python, ☠️, "shape shifter" from SHACL to other formats (currently RDForms).
> - [SHACL To JSON Schema](https://github.com/comake/shacl-to-json-schema) - TS, SHACL To JSON Schema translator.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [ShacShifter](https://github.com/AKSW/ShacShifter) — Python, ☠️, "shape shifter" from SHACL to other formats (currently RDForms).
- [SHACL To JSON Schema](https://github.com/comake/shacl-to-json-schema) — TS, SHACL-to-JSON-Schema translator.
```

## Shape Generators

> - [owl2shacl](https://github.com/sparna-git/owl2shacl) - OWL 2 SHACL conversion rules.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [owl2shacl](https://github.com/sparna-git/owl2shacl) — OWL-to-SHACL conversion rules.
```

## SHACL Validators

> - [Apache Jena SHACL](https://github.com/apache/jena/tree/main/jena-shacl) <img alt="GitHub last commit" src="https://img.shields.io/github/last-commit/apache/jena" align="top"> - Supports SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL; `Apache-2.0` license; `Java`.

Reviewer 2: I thought you'd keep the doc links?!

Author: It should be like this with doc-links?
- [Apache Jena SHACL](https://github.com/apache/jena/tree/main/jena-shacl) <img alt="GitHub Last Release" src="https://img.shields.io/maven-central/v/org.apache.jena/jena-shacl" align="top"> - Supports SHACL Core, SHACL-SPARQL; [docs](https://jena.apache.org/documentation/shacl/index.html); `Apache-2.0` license; `Java`.

Data viewers/Editors based on shapes.

> - [shaperone](https://forms.hypermedia.app) - SHACL Shapes Form generator.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [shaperone](https://forms.hypermedia.app) — SHACL Shapes Form generator.
```

## IDE support

> - [Linked Data Extension](https://github.com/elsevierlabs-os/linked-data) - VS Code Extension for RDF files editing with embedded SHACL validator and SPARQL engine.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- [Linked Data Extension](https://github.com/elsevierlabs-os/linked-data) — VS Code Extension for editing RDF files with embedded SHACL validator and SPARQL engine.
```

## Specifications

- SHACL, W3C Recommendations & Notes

>   - [Shapes Constraint Language (SHACL)](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl/) - W3C Recommendation, 20 July 2017.
>   - [SHACL Advanced Features](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl-af/) - W3C Working Group Note, 08 June 2017.
>   - [SHACL JavaScript Extensions](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl-js/) - W3C Working Group Note, 08 June 2017.
>   - [SHACL Test Suite and Implementation Report](https://w3c.github.io/data-shapes/data-shapes-test-suite/) - W3C Document 17 January 2024.
>   - [SHACL Use Cases and Requirements](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl-ucr/) - W3C Working Group Note 20 July 2017.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - [Shapes Constraint Language (SHACL)](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl/) — W3C Recommendation, 20 July 2017.
  - [SHACL Advanced Features](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl-af/) — W3C Working Group Note, 08 June 2017.
  - [SHACL JavaScript Extensions](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl-js/) — W3C Working Group Note, 08 June 2017.
  - [SHACL Test Suite and Implementation Report](https://w3c.github.io/data-shapes/data-shapes-test-suite/) — W3C Document 17 January 2024.
  - [SHACL Use Cases and Requirements](https://www.w3.org/TR/shacl-ucr/) — W3C Working Group Note 20 July 2017.
```

- SHACL, Community Group Latest Drafts & Notes
  - [SHACL 1.2 Core](https://w3c.github.io/shacl/shacl-core/)
  - [SHACL 1.2 SPARQL Extensions](https://w3c.github.io/shacl/shacl-sparql/)
  - [SHACL Advanced Features 1.1](https://w3c.github.io/shacl/shacl-af/)
  - [SHACL Compact Syntax](https://w3c.github.io/shacl/shacl-compact-syntax/)
  - [SHACL JavaScript Extensions](https://w3c.github.io/shacl/shacl-js/)

- ShEx

>   - [Shape Expressions Language 2.1](https://shex.io/shex-semantics/index.html) - Final Community Group Report 8 October 2019.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
  - [Shape Expressions Language 2.1](https://shex.io/shex-semantics/index.html) — Final Community Group Report 8 October 2019.
```

- ShEx, Drafts
  - [P3330TM/D3 Draft Recommended Practice for Standard for Shape Expression Schemas](https://shexspec.github.io/spec/)

## Legend

> ☠️ -- Each one denotes every 5 year from last update.
> 💰 -- Denotes closed source commercial software.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
☠️ — Each one denotes 5 years (e.g., ☠️☠️☠️ denotes 15 years) since last update.
💰 — Denotes closed source commercial software.
```
